AREA 1

level 0: virus, bacteria, yeast 

level 1: Plankton, shrimp, oysters, barnacles, fungus, mycelium 

level 2: Tuna fish, bass, school fish, frogs, turtles, 

level 3: octopus, ravens, squirrels, dolphins, 

level 4: chimpanzee, gorrila, orangutan,. 

level 5: Human 

level 6: To be determined. 

LEVEL 0:

	Virus: They have a protein shell that contains information for both DNA and RNA
	for self replication. Virus' are essentially organisms that have a strand of 
	DNA that has information on its genome, and molecular structures that allows
	it to self replicate. They self replicate by infecting healthy cells then 
	forcing them to produce more copies of itself. It is theorized that many many
	years ago a virus infected a bacteria which then formed the first cell nucleas. 
	An interesting note in regards to paleoviralogy, is that you can trace
	back virus' by finding examples of its genetic information within the genome
	of differing species, which would then allow you to trace them back to their
	common ancestor, thus estimating the age of the virus. Life itself can be defines
	by the ability to reproduce, produce energy for itself, and to maintain a stable
	internal enviroment. Its components are to be able to sense if it approaches a
	host cell, so a basic sense of "food" this then leads to it reproduing. 
	So a basic sense and to follow what is essentially an imperative program. 

	Bacteria: Humans themselves have bacteria microbiomes that help us. 
	almost a symbiotic type relationship, we offer sheltare in exchange
	for them to help us in certain ways. An example of helpful bacteria
	are gut bacteria which help us digest food. In exchange, we actually
	tell our immune systems to not attack them. An interesting note is that
	gut bacteria play a large role within the human condition, for example 
	most of our seratonin is produced within the gut, so the condition of 
	our gut bacteria can actually affect whether we're happy or not. They 
	can also influence our appetites which is interesting, as certan gut 
	bacteria consumes certain types of foods. Bacteria dont have a nucleas
	they have some organelles though. Bacteria reproduce asexually in a process
	called binary fusion, they essentially just split apart. Some bacteria
	can actually create their own food, analogous to plants. Bacteria can 
	carry extra genetic material in something called a plasmid, this material
	can then be shared with other bacteria in a process called conjugation.
	If this plasmid were to carry genes that can provide anti bacterial resistance, 
	then they would essentially make other bacteria resistant to anti biotics.
	Bacterial transformation is when a bacteria is exposed to some sort of enviromental
	shock, this stress then induces the bacteria to pick up genetic material.      
	bacteria can moniter their surroundings, abiotic or biotic, this is done through sensory
	systems. Bacteria can adapt their behavior and physiology in order to stay alive
	and eventually reporduce. The plasma membrane allows for the acquiring 
	of nutrients, the elimination of waste, the mainting of a constant internal 
	state, it also contains a selective permeable barrier than essentially 
	type checks whatever chemcicle or ion it ecounters then decides accordingly 
	depending on the material. Bacteria can generate energy, reporudce. Bacteria
	can organize themselves into complex strucutres which can form multi celled
	organisms, such as tissues. 

	Yeast: Its a commonly found fungus. They can exhibit multicellular characterisitcs
	by forming strings of connected budding cells (pseudophyphae) They reprodce asexually
	through mitosis. An interesting note on yeast is that they can be used to generate 
	electricity. Yeast gain energy through chemicle compounds such as sucros, fructos, etc. 
	Yeast can form fommunites where they can intereact with its enviroment in 
	order to further optomize the functionality of the yeast. Yeast can interact with other
	cells through the use of peptides and chemicle compounds, this forms essentially 
	a type of language. They communicate in order to adapt to their enviroment. 	
	perhaps yeast adapted to their enviroment by consuming more of sugary substances 
	as thats how they were used by humans 

	
LEVEL 1: 
	Plankton: Plankton are somewhat inhert, just floating around swimming 
	within the ocean. They essentially clean up the ocean. They also produce
	a lot of oxygen, they account for 20% of all photosynthesis. Phytoplankton 
	are single celled organisms that can produce food from the sun and carbon dioxide. 
	An interesting note is that there are many microscopic organisms within the ocean
	some exhibit strange behavior, like building a nest from pray, or even fishing. 
	Most plankton reproduce asexually through something called budding. 
	Plankton can eat diatoms and other protozoans, some just eat sunlight
	and produce oxygen. Pythoplankton are crucial to life so they use chemicle 
	signals to essentially communicate with their predetor zooplankton to not 
	eat them. 

	Shrimp: Shrimp are fairly larger than plankton and other microscopic beings. 
	They aswell dont have organells like the previously listen animals. They have 
	organs such as eyes, stomach, gills, heart, and hepatopancreas. They even have
	an intestine on their abdomen. Some shrimp to escape predetors flip the seabed
	to hide themselves. Some shrimp can even change color in their enviroment 
	in order to hide themselves. Shrimp can bury themselves. Their apendenges 
	can be used to swim quickly  away from predetors who try to eat them. Mantis 
	shrimp can see like 12 colors, they're powerful, they can spear other fish and
	beat them to death. Some shrimp have symbiotic relationships, such as 
	emperor shrimp and cleaner shrimp and tiger pistol shrimp. Shrimp can reproduce 
	with opposite gender shrimp. There are male and female shrimp, the male
	shrimp impregnates the female shrimp, interestingly enough, female choice
	exists within shrimp, which then produces stronger offspring and prevents
	inbreeding. Shrimp also have a basic form of communication, being able
	to make sounds which can then be interpereted by other shrimp. Other fish
	do not eat cleaner shrimp, which is very interesting. Apparently, other
	fish know not to eat cleaner shrimp based on their striped patterns and their
	antenna movements. The fish would pose (stay still) then the cleaner shrimp
	perform movements with their attena signaling that they want to clean them
	and get a free meal. After this, the fish changes to a darker color, the
	cleaning then begins. cleaner shrimp are color blind, thats why a darker pigmentation
	is neccesary. Fish will actually change their behavior in order to get cleaned
	they'll choose cleaning over mating and food oppurtunities. They'll even
	migrate to locations with more cleaners. 

	Oysters: They are mollusks held tight within a shell. They are filter feeders.
	They can also clean water. They can sort food from silt, they're good water
	filters. Oysters reproduce by broadcast spawning, they can switch genders from male
	to female etc. Oysters need seeds to latch onto to. Oysters are actually bred
	to have 3 chromosomes, this is done through genetic engineering by humans. Some 
	oysters have 2 genders others have both sperm and eggs. Oysters can apparently
	communicate through the use of shell closing and opening in reponses to their enviroment. 
	Oysters can respond to their enviroment somewhat, by closing their shell until high 
	tide return or by limiting the occurence of reproduction depending on the 
	temperature of the water. Oysters have 2 masses of nerves but no brain. 

	Barnacles: Crustacians that are bound to a hard surface, which can be 
	turtles and crabs even. The barnacles shell closes when it is not underwater. 
	Barnacles are both male and female and use their elongated sex organ to 
	reach out and fertilize any nearby eggs. They secrete a cement like substance in
	order to stay put. Barnacles stretch out apendages to gather food from 
	the sea and to eat it. Proximity is necessary for reproduction so adult 
	barnacles within groups secrete chemicles that tell younger barnacles to
	come closer to setlle with them. 

	Fungi/Mycelium: mushroom are kinda roots rooting out from fungi in order to 
	release out spores to reproduce. Certain fungi can actually mind control insects
	in order to reproduce. Anti bacteria resistant bacteria put upon certain fungi
	can stimulate the release of compounds designed to essentially them off.  	
	An interesting note is that fungi can and have had applications within medicine,
	chemistry, biology, and even civil engineering, as well as of course food. 
	IDEA::<generalize the process of hypothesising applications when given certain 
	substances, proccesses, materials, concepts, etc. Then implement in some sort of 
	software, idealized software would give reccomendations on different areas 
	to research to solve an academic or perhaps even an engineering problem>

	Certain fungi such as slime molds can solve mazes, form communities, 
	and even form networks similar to man made tunnel systems. Correction:
	It can can improve the layout of man made networks. The first multi cellular
	life to have ever been found on fossil record is a mycelian network, suggesting
	that complex life may have emerged from fungi. An interesting note is that fungi
	were instrumental to the decrease of size from pre historic animals to 
	relatively modern animals, as it was the emergence of lignin eating fungi that
	decomposed the co2 within dead trees which eventually decreased the massive 
	concentration of o2 within the atmosphere. The zombie fungi can control 
	ants to move to very high ledges to then colonize them. Many mushroom produce 
	very very useful and harmful chemicle compounds, from poisonous mushrooms to 
	mushrooms that can regrow human neurons and even anti carcenegenic mushroom. 
	 

	Fungi can interconnect different components of nature like trees. They can communicate 
	through the web to share information of things like pests, share nutrients, etc. Trees on the network survive much better. 

	Mycelium are essentially fungi networks, they have much higher gene expression compared to the 
	fruit body stage (mushroom) Older trees have deeper denser networks, this networks are biased, 
	where trees would give more nutrients to their kin. 
	An interesting note is that mycelium can be implemented within casts to form plastics. 
	Fubgi can eat rock so to speak, releasing acid to extract a meal of minerals. Fungi were some of the 
	first living creature. Ancient fungi resembled trees. Nutrients from dead creatures are released by fungi. 
	Hiphea envelop tree routes to exchange water and minerals for sugars. An interesting note on fungi infections is that 
	they can happen to humans and be more frequent thanks to global warming. 

LEVEL 2:

	Tuna: Tuna can actually regulate its own body temperature. They're one of 
	the few warmblooded fish. An interesting note is that mackerals form up 
	balls in order to scare predators (doesnt work) yellow fin tuna can 
	perform manuvers at high speed to catch pray. Blue fin tuna resemble a
	tear drop in shape, the most hydrodynamic shape possible. The fins in the
	tuna are retractable. Tuna reproduce by releasing sperm and eggs into the
	water. Despite tuna traversing entire oceans, they always return to their
	place of birth to spawn. Tuna can form schools in accordance to size. An
	interesting note is that fish can communicate with eachother using 
	techniques such as movements, electrical signals, chemical signals, 
	biolumisescants, etc. The hunting technique of the tune is fairly 
	specialized, their greatest attribute is speed so they mostly just 
	swim down prey and swallow them. Tuna are believed to be exceptionally intelligent
	being able to adapt to fishing techniques. It should be noted that the 
	bluefin tuna have exceptional navigation abilities, its plausible that 
	this can occur throgh chemical mapping as tuna have acute senses of smell.    
	The yellow fin itself has a magnatite in its brain. It should be noted that
	its been reported that certain schooling fish have the ability of knowledge transfer, 
	
	
	Bass: They hunt by ambushing their prey, they use surprise and speed as
	hunting tools. When conditions meet, a male bass would actually prepare
	a location to spawn eggs, then would search out for a receptive female. 
	A male bass would fan the nest of eggs to oxygenate them. Male bass go weeks
	without eating for weeks in order to tend to their spawn. Very few baby
	fish actually make it to live, which explains why so many are spawned. 
	Bass travel together based on size. Large mouth bass are the most intelligent
	of all the game fish, they can learn to recognize specific lures that hooked them. 
	Fish can actually remember people. I have found an example of a female bass
	which rememembers a man, and would often visit him and chase off other fish 
	from him.
	
	School Fish: schooling is an interesting example of emergence. Schooling 
	fish focus on just 2 rules, dont stay too far or too close to your neihgbor
	and keep swimming. All examples of emergence can be broken down to 
	basic rules. An interesting note is that the basic function of the neuron 
	is to either exite or inhibit other neruons. Fish can actually adjust the
	rythm of tail beats to take advantage of vortexes to save energy. Herring fish
	will get a higher respiritory rate when seperated from a school, this stress
	encourages social behavior. Being in a school provides many benifits to 
	fish, like preventing predetors from wiping them out one by one, reproduction, 
	and foraging. Fish swim in a grid where the distance between them is equal to 
	the jump length of the predetor fish. An interesting not is that predetors 
	have developed counters to schoaling, dolphine for example herd them then 
	take turns coming in and eating the densly packed fish. Another technique is
	to herd them to shallower water to more easily pick them apart. The craziest 
	technique is for one dophin to dive into the school and herd them into a 
	barrier of dolphins who then slaps their fluke punching them into the air
	the dolphine then leap into the air and eat them. Dolphins can even cooperate
	with human hunters, who herd schools into nets, the dissorention of the
	nets allows the dolphine to quickly snatch up the fish. Some whales lunge feed
	where they accelerate to high speeds below schools then lunge upwards eating them. 
	fish mostly use their eyes and lateral lines to know when to school, they 	
	actually develop the ability to school from a young age, shoaling with just a pair
	as they mature they become more advanced at it and eventually shoal with many 
	other fish. 

	Frogs: amphibions, they eat anything, even other frogs. Frogs breeed
	throgh amplexis which fertilizes eggs externally. The females are much 
	larger than the males. Frogs start off as tadopole herbavores, they eventually
	grow legs and become frogs. Poisson dart frogs evolved to have poisson 
	within them, killing any animal that attempts to eat them. Frog skin 
	served respiritory function and excretes a substance to keep it moist and
	protected. Certain frogs burrow and live underground. Frogs mainly communicate vocaly
	they can also communicate through the use of hopping and other visual cues. Frogs
	hunt using their sticky tongues to get insects and even small animals, they
	usually wait for one to pass by them then pounce on them. Some frogs protect
	eggs until they hatch, some create create channels to save eggs from drying up, 
	others swallow them then protect them from danger then later regurgitate them   

	Turtles: many eggs are layed on the beach to ensure that some make it to the ocean. 
	The gender of the hatchling are determined by temperature. Sea turtles hve
	magnetite within their brains, they have an internal gps. Most turtles are
	oppurtinstic omnivors just eating whatever they can by ambush, the snapping
	turtle has an apendog on its tongue that looks like a worm to lure in fish. 
	Turtles can communicate through sound but its mainly for mating and cohesion 
	for migration. Turtles like to rape eachother apparently. Turtles can touch eachother, 
	squirt water, and blink in order to communicate which is typically done during coutship. 
	Turtles are fairly intelligent, they instinctually retreat into their shell when there is danger
	they can solve mazes, remember people, and remember what time to eat.
	Interestingly enough other males would try to wedge the male sea turtle off the
	female in order to mate instead, they'll do things like blast airbubbles, bite flippers, 
	and even try to stick their head between them. Turtles fling more sand to
	hide the location of their eggs. Turtles only return to the place of their
	birth when they are large enough, until then, they migrate to safer ocean.
	Turtles have pretty good spatial awareness.  

LEVEL 3:

	Octopus: Octopus can squirt out ink to get away from predators, it a 
	sort of distraction. It can also camoflauge itself to blend into its
	surroundings. They are the smartest inverterbrate. Octopus can use intelligence
	to solve puzzles, open difficult containers, and go through mazes. The intelligence 
	of the octopus is distrivuted amongst its body, for example most of its intelligence is
	distributed among its legs. If you were to cut the leg of an octopus it would
	have somewhat of a mind of its own, it would actually autonomously hunt
	for food and even bring it back to the main body. The only hard part of
	the octopus is its beak, this allows it to squeeze into tight spaces. 
	One of its legs has sperm in in. When octopus places eggs onto the roof
	of sea cavern, she would stay and fan gently the egs with water, she would
	actually starve to death during this process. Octopus can retain complex memories, 
	use tools and use foresight, and use visual cues. They can even play. 
	The ink has tyrenosous which can block senses, it can also compromise repiristory 
	functions. Certain octopus can actually change their texture, some can even
	manipulate their shape to mimick other animals. Octopuses are believed to 
	have their own personalities. They can learn and change their behavior over 
	time. Octopus camoglouge reaction times are faster than the fastest reaction times,
	around 200 milliseconds. An interesting note is that octopus have a large 
	quanitity of neurons, around 1/2 billion or so, this rivals dogs, this is 
	strange as octopuses evolved from a complete sperate evolutionary branch from mammals 
	or vertbrates in general. Octopus can actually plan, a good example is
	an octopus carrying cocounut shells to a place where there is not much shelter,
	to then use it as shelter. This is also an example of tool use. An experiment
	conducted showed that pill bottles pushed with water jets would get shot down
	by the octopus, similar to bouncing a ball. One should note that play is 
	not evolutionarily neccessary for the octopus. Apparently there have
	been some cases of octopus hunting cooperatively with other fish. Octopus
	saliva has a paralizing effect which it uses when hunting. Octopuses 
	can apparently communicate through postering and changing colors.  
	Octopus display pale colors when they are being friendly and show darker
	colors when they are going to get aggresive and fight other octopus. 
	Octopus can actually recognize different humans. Octopus can build dens 
	using rocks and other materials that they find. 

	Ravens (I will include crows): Ravens can gather food then hide them from other birds, if he thinks hes
	been spotted he would then flea. Ravens would actually pretend to make 
	caches to trick other birds. Ravens can actually partner up, stay together in a certain area,
	and then actually stay together for ever, almost like marriage. Ravens can pass things
	beak to claw whilst flying. They could be playing or they could be teasing 
	other ravens. Ravens make and mimmick more sounds than any other animal. 
	Ravens have a unique dive, some think its for fun. Ravens can actually meet up
	together and play. An interesting note is that crows are also extremely intelligent,
	the can utilize the size and power of crows top open nuts, hold grudges, and
	many more. Crows were able to figure out to drop rocks into floating items
	in order to get the food out. Certail crows actually constructed tools in
	order to solve certain puzzles. Crows are also able to pick out certain 
	keys in order to get certain foods in boxes. An interesting note is that the
	cereberal cortex within our brain is often assosiated with complex mental 
	abilites, the pallium within the raven brain has similar circuitry and neural
	structure to the cereberal cortex. The cereberal cortex has nerve fibers 
	running horizontally and vertically. Many such cases reject the social 
	intelligence hypothesis. Ravens can sometimes play with wolf pups. 

	Squirrels: Squirrels are known to collect nuts and even raid birds nests
	to eat eggs and chicks. Squirrels cache food during the autumn to store 
	for the winter to hibernate, as food is in short supply during Winter. 
	Squirrels typically hibernate in small drays that they build, they 
	also give birth in these drays. Squirrels would actually use deception
	when making caches, trying to confuse potential spys. Squirrels can 
	apprently learn from other animals. Squirrels can actually remember the 
	caches months later. Squirrels test for seeds and holes within nuts
	to know if they're worth burrying. Squirrels can remember the locations
	of up to 10,000 nuts that they bury within a 7 acre wide area. They use whats
	called a memory map in order to acheive this. Typically we use landmarks
	to map out locations for certain things, squirrels do the same thing, they use
	unique parts of the location like perhaps a fellen tree or a bush or whatever. 
	They also organize their nuts, they put their peanuts in one place, and
	their hazeluts in another place. Similar to China town and little italy 
	if you want a human like analogy. They have a 90% success rate recovering nuts. 
	Squirrels communicate in a variety of ways, they can tail wave, chirp, or bark.
	If a squirrel has a human host, they will oftem remember them. The sound that
	they communicate can vary in intent, from asking their mothers for food, to
	warning of danger, to looking for a mate, and for communicating aggresion.
	Female choice is apparent within squirrels, they choose the strongest male
	after they give off a scent to attract mates. Male squirrels try to 
	block the vagina with a wax like substance to be the only sire.   
	
	Dolphins: The brain to body ratio is second only to humans. Dolphins employ
	a tactic to hunt fish by kicking up sand and then another signals to the other
	dolphins to catch the escaping fish. Dolphins pass down this behavior 
	from generation to generation. Some dolphins have actually exhibited tool use
	they would place sponges on their nose to avoid sharp corals from damaging them. 
	Dolphins can also understand languages that were built from hand gestures and whistles. 
	Dolphins are also one of the few species to have self recognition and
	meta cognition. Dolphins mourn the dead and even help drowning humans. 
	Dolphins were able to use teamwork to solve puzzles. Another interesting hunting
	strategy is to use tactics to establish shoaling fish bait balls. Orcas
	females actually play with pup seals in order to teach their calves. 

	Chimpanzees: OOOH OOOH HAAAA HAAAA. Chimpanzees "laugh" when having fun, and apparently kiss
	aswell when making up after some sort of fight. The validity of this
	I think is uncertain. Chimpanzees have used sticks as dipping sticks to extract 
	honey from holes. This behavior was actually learned through other chimps
	and was essentially spread and passed on. Chimps actually understand the
	concept of trade and value. Chimp society is highly social, they base 
	society on family and friendships. Chimps are apparently not fooled by 
	robotic spy animals, meaning that they can actually tell if something is off. 
	A chimp has actually hid one of these robots. The chimp didnt want
	to share the turtle robot and kept yelling at the other chimps. Chimpanzees
	have been observed to wage war against other tribes and hunt monkeys, they have specific roles
	in combat, some are ambushers, blockers, and driver. Chimpanzees fight 
	off rival communities. Young chimps attempt to impress troop leaders
	in order to get accepted into their ranks. In response they got increasingly
	angry at him and attacked them. The purpose of ranks is to distribute the
	best food and to get the attention of females. Chimps have a very very
	basic form of language but its really just ways to communicate through
	facial expressions and screams. They have facial expressions for play,
	for fear, for aggresion, etc. Chimp communities are structured into 
	groups, these can be all male groups designed for hunting meat, or all
	female groups designed for nursing young. Chimps are somewhat autonomous
	they usually do things like forage for food on their own or in small groups
	rather than a parent community. Chimps are within whats called a fission
	fusion society, they are typically dynamic in size, composition, and location. 
	Interestingly enough the power strucuture somewhat evolves from the amount of allies
	one chimp may have, as any coallition that can exhibit violence can then
	be prime for taking over some higher end position. Social grooming is very
	important for chimps who are forming any type of bond or coallition.
	I suppose mating is somewhat like a commodity within chimp society, from
	the looks of it they have female choice, reproductive access is also sometimes
	restricted only to high ranking males. It has been observed that females 
	may mate with multiple males within the community and even mate with 
	chimps outside of their community. It has said that alternate mating 
	strategies exist to allow females opportunities whilst also not loosing
	favor within their community. Some mothers practice infanticide, no one
	really knows why. Baby chimps are helpless, they rely on their mothers 
	for many many months. Chimpanzees have passed the mirror test, have been
	seen using insects to tend to wounds, establish culutre (different grooming and
	foraging techniques and what not). Chimpanzees have a basic understanding
	of numbers and can even cooperate together to solve puzzles for food. 
	It should be noted that cooperation would he held with the best cooperator 
	within the community and then competition would arise which would decrease 
	cooperation and then would rise back to high levels after punishments were
	introduces and other arbitrage behaviours. Chimps react to the dead, 
	theyll yell out wildely when a chimp would suddendly die, and would
	care for dying elders and avoid the place they died at and act subdued. 
	Chimps apprently lack theory of mind from certain experiments. Tool use has
	been reported to occur within chimps, they can use twigs and sticks to 
	gather honey and to dip for ants, they can also use stones to crack open nuts. 
	Language doesnt really exist within chimps, in experiments its more 
	like drills then actual linguistic understanding. Some chimp males
	actually trade meat with females for sex. 

	Gorrilas: Gorillas are relatively peacful, they are fairly tolerant with baby
	gorillas and even members of other species. There have been examples of gorillas
	being protective of human children, they are usually calm and gentlte 
	with baby gorillas, supposedly this softness makes them more attractive. 
	There have been gorillas who have been cared for in captivity by humans who
	would later remember them after many years. The gorilla in this example
	would respond the calls of the man and come to ashore to see him, remembering his voice. 
	The gorillas actually embraced the human to a degree and introduced him 
	to his family. When the man left the gorillas actually decided to follow the
	boat. He stayed opposite to where the man slept, he stayed up all night
	to see him bassicly. There has been a video of a mother showing a 
	female gorillas her kid, the female gorillas also showed her hers, 
	and appeared to reach out to grab the kid, of course there was glass.
	Gorillas try to impress females, they do this with displays of strength.
	Gorillas have a vocalization for position. Their structure consists of one dominant male, 
	a bunch of females, and kid gorillas. When a male matures after 12 years he goes on to start his own family, 
	sometimes with a splinter group. Gorillas have a range of behaviors when a gorilla dies, from no reaction at all,
 	to members of the group actually paying respects to the dead gorilla. Female gorillas fear the prospect of male gorillas
 	not acting nice to their kids so they mate with every male to avoid this. This also happens with dolphins apparently. 
	An interesting note is that bonobos are like domesticated chimps, they have smaller brains smaller heads are less aggressive and 
	have less of a physical difference between males and females, similar to domesticated animals. They are not domesticated by humans though 
	which is strange. Bonobos are relatively sex crazed, especially when there is social tension. There was a water bird incident with a chimp, 
	a chimp which was taught sign language saw a swan and said water bird with sign language. There are essentially 2 schools of thought with language, 
	behaviorist and nome chompsky school, behaviorist just says that language is like a type writer and a chimp, every good word said is reinforced, 
	eventually language is developed. The behaviorist then state that any thing can be taught language. Chompsky disagreed, there are elements
 	in language consistent along cultures, and thus language is something that is uniquely human and is not based on reinforcements as 
	that would be way too compliated. The swan bird incident was essentially a counter to chompsky. Koko was taught about 100 different 
	signs with her having a growth spurt of around 2 years, similar to human development. Koko could do things like describe things and 
	even lie. Apparently koko grieved for Robin Williams, eventually she learned up to 2000 signs. Koko couldn't be a mom but still wanted
	 to become one, so she adopted a kitten. Nim chimpsky was a chimp taught sign language, it turns out that he had randomly occurred words
 	and would interrupt in conversation and would never initiate, these things are present in children who can actually communicate. 
	Patterson uses individual examples to showcase kokos abilities, there is very little raw data. Koko and other monkeys are bruteforcing
	 answers and follow prompts. Apes never stop mimicking they never begin original language. 
	
	Orangutans: Orangutans are highly intelligence apes, known to escape
	zoos and use very basic tools. Fu manchu an orangutan, hid a metal pick
	under its cheek pouch to escape. Orangutans spent a lot of time with their
	mothers, this allows them to learn from their mothers like how to get 
	food and what not. Female orangutans stay with their mothers to learn 
	how to take care of young. Oranugtans build nests. They can turn branches
	to swat flys and scratch their backs, they can build umbrellas, and 
	even use plants to tend to their wounds. Orangutans also passed the 
	mirror test. Orangutans also have foresight, in experiments they chose
	straws over fruits just in case they encountered more soup boxes that needed
	straws. 

LEVEL 5:
	

	Humans: Humans are of course the most intelligent animal on earth. 
	We have developed things like language to communicate with eachother, 
	this type of communication is ever evolving, going from basic oral language
	to hierogliphics to full on written language. Written language would take
	some time to be fully institutionalized into the eduction system, 
	making it standard for people to read and write. We would go on 
	to develop instatanous oral, written, and abstact communication 
	through the use of the phone, radio, email, and the internet respecitvely. 
	Humans have a high capacity for abstarct reasoning, developing things
	like philosophy and thought experiments which attempt to explain 
	and formalize very abstract topics and answer very abstract questions, 
	like what does it mean to be human, how should we live our lives etc. 
	Humans have many different cultures and societies depending on the region, 
	a commonality amongst us is our aptitude for language and religion, all
	of which are developed irrespective of other populations. One could also 
	argue that scientific inquiry is developed independantly, though the results
	from this vary. Certain relgious cultures like Islam opted out of scientific
	development due mainly to their philosophy, they saw it easier to understand 
	the relgious texts as opposed to the natural world as if the natural world
	was made by God, it would serve them better to research God and relgion 
	than to develop science. Christain soceity was the opposite, they saw
	the natural world aswell as being a product of God, though they believed 
	that studying the natural world would essentially bring them closer to 
	God. This philisophical difference allowed for Christain society to lap 
	Islamic society in progress despite Islamic society being perfectly capable of it.
	Another interesting note on philosophy is something called the axial age, 
	the greatest philosophers in human kind came about during this time, Islam, Greek philsophy,
	Christianity, etc. This age also dealt with the largest populations of people at the 
	time, this proximity beget violence and crime, so one could argue that these
	tough times naturally spurred the greatest philosophers and religions to
	arise in order to teach people how to live. One of the most important philsophies
	developed is the socratic principle, which was later adopted by Aristotle and
	formalized into the scientific method which is still used today to make 
	discoveries. Humans also have a keen creative ability. We take what we learn
	or what we know and then apply it in fields like engineering, and to 
	be more abstract, we get subjective personal ideas and extend them to some
	sensory aspect, be it visual with painting or illustrative works, or auditoral
	with music, etc. This is called art. Both of these seemingly different 
	aspects of humanity emerge from asbtraction. Humans have also developed more
	strucutred and representive languages usually in a mathematical scope. we
	developed number systems, algebraic systems, logical systems and so on. 
	This allows new math to be created which can describe the natural world 
	or can be something completely unique and abstract. The foundations of math
	are shacky but aswell is mostly comprised of abstaction. Humans have 
	complicated emotional psychological aspects. We form long lasting relationships
	and often base our existance and even our societies and culutures off of them. 
	It is taboo to commit incest and morally wrong to kill ones family or friends. 
	We also mourn the dead, we have a near complete understanding of death and
	its implications, the only thing that alludes us is what absolutely happens 
	after death. Human behavior is vast but is largely dependant on what is
	socially and morally acceptable, with these depending on ethics, which in turn, 
	in a way, depends on what we know to be true. Humans have interesting 
	functions that are unique to us, we can dream, visualize things very clearly, 
	and can empathize completely with people. Humans have a long history of tool
	use, often evolving these tools as competition arrises. Human society is
	often based on the principles of there being a finite amount of resources in 
	the earth and thus needs to be managed effectively, this management is described as
	economics, the nature of the economy is dependant on the host country, but
	most adopt a free market capatalistic economy. Capatilism is essentially based on 
	competition and who ever provides the highest quality good is who succeeds in the end.
	This success is quantified with currency, the nature of this currency can vary. 
	It should be noted that much of economics is not fully understood at a fundemetal level, 
	it is not like deterministic physics, it is extremely difficult to predict the economy, 
	as it is a system comprising of up to billions of humans. One thing is certain however, 
	that generally, poeple, markets, and firms often lead to a effecient allocation of resources, 
	this phenomena is dubbed the "invisible hand principle" Humans mainly act in accordance 
	with the principles of economics, we continously strive to make things effecient 
	and easier. Human psychology itself is quite complex, we dont fully understand what
	causes people to become depressed or motivated or to fall in love. Love
	is highly culturally dependant. It evolved from logic based, where people 
	would plan marriages in exchange to get closer to a family or to have free
	labor for farms, to romance based as life became easier and was promoted by 
	royals, and then to sex and attraction based as capatilism created an entire market
	for looks and marriage and dating and all this other stuff. Gladiators which were
	romans fighting in an arena were highly sought after as mates, rich women
	would often pay to have gladiators sleep with them, they were culturally speaking
	the most attractive to women, they could essentially get any girl they want
	and this was based on title and reputation alone. A prime example of which
	was this one gladiator who ran away with a noble woman to egypt, he was hideous, 
	countless battles in the arena left his faced deformed, he was an ugly bastard,
	still his reputation as a gladiator landed him a high ranking society lady, 
	this illustrates just how much culture impacts love. Interestingly enough
	humanity seems to be approaching a pattern of unity, over time we have become
	less pregidous and racist, entire philsophies and ideologies have developed just
	on the idea of inclusivity, such as the woke and social justice movements. These
	movements are taking over Western civilization and promote wide spread immigration
	and anti racism and tolerance to a significant extent, going as far 
	as to demonize the majority inhabitants of a nation. The antithesis to this
	is nationalism and fascism, there have been countries in the past that demonstrated 
	this, Nazi Germany believed in an aryan race and looked down upon cross breeding
	and the tolerance and other races and the like. Both social justice/wokeness and 
	extreme right wing fascism are on opposing ends of the spectrum. Both
	kind of influence each other, modern alt right movements exist only in response 
	to wokeness, and wokeness exists only as an anti thesis to the horrors of WW2 
	and the oppression of minority races in their host nation. As humanity moves 
	to more unified state it constantly switches between crazed idealogies as
	it attempts to reach some sort of balance. These exhagerated responses 
	are probably due to our fundementally tribal nature, we naturally
	mate with those of the same race and culture, we naturally surround ourselves
	and work with those who look and act most like us, again racially and culturally. 
	There is a commonality of prejudice within every region, far eastern nations
	exhibit racism, western cultures would war with eachother, Africans would aswell
	war with eachother, Westerners obviously would oppress anyone that isnt like them, 
	even others of the same race but differing cultures like the Irish. The basic
	commonality is that we act favorably to those who are like us, this is due to our 
	tribal nature, however, humans also have a nature to be effecient and thus 
	seek the most effecient method and outcome, ultimately this is globalization
	and ultra interconnectivity, this thesis and antithesis so to speak create 
	psychological conflicts within humans, which explains things like slavery, apparthide,
	Nazism, wokeism, and bassicly anything that exists at one end of the spectrum. 
	All in all humans are highly structured animals, we seek stucture in the way 
	we think, the way we live our lives, our value system, etc. This structure ultimately
	leads to some sort of globalization, though humans also have tribalistic and greedy
	aspects to them. I will also note the social dependancy of humans and the negative effects of certain innovations, 
	the most obvious of which being the internet. For the majority of human existance we
	lived in tight knit groups, families, villages, and such. The development of the internet connected 
	us but ironically enough divided us to a great extent. Most people have troubles 
	finding love and must deal with extreme competition and cultural descent that 
	is present within dating apps, these apps are monetized purposely to get 
	as many people in whats called a hookup culture. It should be noted that 
	free market capatlism is completely ineffective at providing social services. 
	The insanity and greed of the free market has turned the dating structure or just
	social structure into a dis tasteful comptetition. Loneliness is an epidemic 
	currently. Work culture is another interesting part of human society, 
	many people either adopt a neet type attitude such as the Chinese youth, where
	as some adopt an extreme grind culture attitude, where they do as much as they 
	can to achieve success and get ahead in life. Another effect of the internet
	is political discourse, politics is more polarized than it has been in a very long time
	a big part of that is due to the internet. Modern political discourse is essentially
	just making fun of the opposing side with ridicule and memes now, in the past
	it was for the most part intellectual debate.

	Extra: there is proactive aggression and reactive aggression. Humans have very little
 	reactive aggression, our proactive aggression is similar to chimps, all animals start battles
 	proactively if they have the advantage. Lack of reactive aggression is uniquely human, domestication 
	is minimizing reactive aggression. It takes but a few generations to change characteristics of animals 
	through domestication. One theory is that any coalition that can kill alphas would eventually be able to
 	impose values, like rules, ethics almost. Sexual intimidation is a long term aspect within several social
 	species. Males often have advantages over females, this apparently calls back to coalitions. A lot of great 
	men do bad things apparently. 